README.md, before:

# Introduction

This project explores using [`libvirt`](https://libvirt.org/) based tools to create Virtual Machines (*VMs*).

Intention is to create VMs from cloud disk image provided by GNU/Linux distributions and for basic initialization use [`cloud-init`](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

> [!NOTE]
> The project is developed on [Debian 12](https://www.debian.org/) if you use another distribution have that in mind if something doesn't work as expected.

🦈

# Requirements

- GNU/Linux OS capable of running [QEMU/KVM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BgZHbCDFODk) based VMs.

# Installation and setup

## QEMU and Virtual Machine Manager

Check compatibility:

    grep -o 'vmx\|svm' /proc/cpuinfo # If nothing comes back check BIOS to make sure virtualization is enabled

Install and setup on Debian/Ubuntu:

    sudo apt-get install virt-manager
    sudo adduser <USER_NAME> libvirt # Add user to `libvirt` group
    sudo adduser <USER_NAME> libvirt-qemu

[Video instructions](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ozYKkaVK0_A). 📽️

## Cloud disk image

Download [`genericcloud` image](https://cdimage.debian.org/images/cloud/) for Debian version you wish to use in VMs. You can also use cloud image for another distribution if you wish.

## 🦈 installation

Copy `./shark` to your `echo $PATH` and set execute permission on it with:

    chmod +x shark

# Usage

To create VM config files, most notably `Sharkfile` which defines VM, in empty directory execute:

    shark init

`./example_vm_configuration_generated_with_init_action` directory contains example of VM configuration generated with `shark init` command.

You **must** edit `Sharkfile` before creating VM with command:

    shark up

Commit message:

Add `down` and `destroy` actions

README.md, after:

# Introduction

This project explores using [`libvirt`](https://libvirt.org/) based tools to create Virtual Machines (*VMs*).

Intention is to create VMs from cloud disk image provided by GNU/Linux distributions and for basic initialization use [`cloud-init`](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

> [!NOTE]
> The project is developed on [Debian 12](https://www.debian.org/) if you use another distribution have that in mind if something doesn't work as expected.

🦈

# Requirements

- GNU/Linux OS capable of running [QEMU/KVM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BgZHbCDFODk) based VMs.

# Installation and setup

## QEMU and Virtual Machine Manager

Check compatibility:

    grep -o 'vmx\|svm' /proc/cpuinfo # If nothing comes back check BIOS to make sure virtualization is enabled

Install and setup on Debian/Ubuntu:

    sudo apt-get install virt-manager
    sudo adduser <USER_NAME> libvirt # Add user to `libvirt` group
    sudo adduser <USER_NAME> libvirt-qemu

[Video instructions](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ozYKkaVK0_A). 📽️

## Cloud disk image

Download [`genericcloud` image](https://cdimage.debian.org/images/cloud/) for Debian version you wish to use in VMs. You can also use cloud image for another distribution if you wish.

## 🦈 installation

Copy [`./shark`](shark) to your `echo $PATH` and set execute permission on it with:

    chmod +x shark

# Usage

To create VM config files, most notably `Sharkfile` which defines VM, in empty directory execute:

    shark init

[`./example_vm_configuration_generated_with_init_action`](example_vm_configuration_generated_with_init_action) directory contains example of VM configuration generated with `shark init` command.

You **must** edit `Sharkfile` before creating VM with command:

    shark up

To shutdown VM:

    shark down

To destroy VM and its storage:

    shark destroy
